docs/integration.rst, before:

Integrate with
==============

HomeKit
-------

Introduction
~~~~~~~~~~~~

HomeKit is a smart home system to control appliances. MTDA may advertise itself
as a HomeKit compatible (but not certified) device to let users turn test devices
ON or OFF using Apple's Home application or its assistant (Siri).

Configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Add the following configuration block to your MTDA configuration file::

    [assistant]
    variant=homekit
    name=MyDevice
    port=32768

where ``name`` is the user-friendly name to be advertise on the network and
``port`` the network port to listen on.

Setup
~~~~~

Use the IOS Home application to register your MTDA device as an accessory

.. image:: homekit_add_1.png
   :width: 50%
   :align: center

Proceed without a QR code by tapping on ``I Don't have a Code or Cannot Scan``

.. image:: homekit_add_2.png
   :width: 50%
   :align: center

The requested code may be found in the MTDA logs (``/var/log/mtda.log``). For
instance::

    Enter this code in your HomeKit app on your iOS device: 891-68-283

To finalize the setup of your MTDA device, tell ``Home`` where it sits and give
it a name. It is recommended to display our MTDA device as a ``Power Point``.

The ``Home`` application should now have an outlet icon for your MTDA and show its
status. Tapping on the icon will toggle power for the device attached to MTDA.

LAVA
----

Introduction
~~~~~~~~~~~~

LAVA is a continuous integration platform for deploying and testing operating systems
onto physical and virtual hardware. It needs methods to power targets, write system
images and interact with the system (usually over a serial console). These mechanics
can be provided/abstracted by MTDA. A sample deployment is shown below:

.. image:: lava_mtda_workers.png

This section provides some guidance to install LAVA and configure it to interact with
MTDA agents. Please refer to the LAVA documentation for details or for more advanced
configuration.

Install on Debian
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A LAVA instance may be installed on Debian with ``apt``::

    $ sudo apt install -y lava

Create ``/etc/lava-server/settings.conf`` with the following settings for a
simple installation::

    "ALLOWED_HOSTS": ["infra-lava.lan"]
    "CSRF_COOKIE_SECURE": false
    "SESSION_COOKIE_SECURE": false

Replace ``infra-lava.lan`` with the network name of your Debian server. A super
user should be created::

    $ sudo lava-server manage createsuperuser --username john --email=john@foo.com

The web interface should be enabled with::

    $ sudo a2dissite 000-default
    $ sudo a2enmod proxy
    $ sudo a2enmod proxy_http
    $ sudo a2ensite lava-server.conf
    $ sudo service apache2 restart
    $ sudo service lava-server-gunicorn restart

Attach to lava-server
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The sample NanoPI NEO image comes with the ``lava-dispatcher`` package
pre-installed. It however needs to be configured to connect to the LAVA master
and logger installed as noted above. You may connect to the MTDA agent using
``ssh`` (default credentials are ``mdta``/``mtda``)::

    $ ssh mtda@mtda-for-de0-nano-soc.lan

Use ``vi`` to edit ``/etc/lava-dispatcher/lava-slave``::

    $ sudo vi /etc/lava-dispatcher/lava-slave

and set the following variables to match your network::

    MASTER_URL="tcp://infra-lava.lan:5556"
    LOGGER_URL="tcp://infra-lava.lan:5555"
    HOSTNAME="--hostname mtda-for-de0-nano-soc.lan"

The service should be restarted::

    $ sudo systemctl restart lava-slave

Device support
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A ``mtda`` device type may be added to your LAVA installation and used as a
base for devices added to your LAVA instance. Create
``/etc/lava-server/dispatcher-config/device-types/mtda.jinja2`` as follows::

    {# device_type: mtda #}
    {% extends 'base.jinja2' %}

    {% set def_mtda_agent = 'localhost' %}
    {% set mtda_cli = 'mtda-cli -r ' ~ mtda_agent|default(def_mtda_agent) %}

    {% set connection_command = mtda_cli ~ ' console raw' %}
    {% set power_off_command = mtda_cli ~ ' target off' %}
    {% set power_on_command = mtda_cli ~ ' target on' %}
    {% set hard_reset_command = mtda_cli ~ ' target reset' %}

    {% set def_mtda_deploy_cmds = [mtda_cli ~ ' target off',
                                   mtda_cli ~ ' storage host',
                                   mtda_cli ~ ' storage write "{IMAGE}"',
                                   mtda_cli ~ ' storage target'] %}

    {% block body %}
    actions:
      deploy:
        methods:
          flasher:
            commands: {{ mtda_deploy_cmds|default(def_mtda_deploy_cmds) }}
      boot:
        connections:
          serial:
        methods:
          minimal:
    {% endblock body %}

    {% block timeouts %}
    timeouts:
      actions:
        bootloader-retry:
          minutes: 2
        bootloader-interrupt:
          minutes: 5
        bootloader-commands:
          minutes: 5
      connections:
        bootloader-retry:
          minutes: 2
        bootloader-interrupt:
          minutes: 5
        bootloader-commands:
          minutes: 5
    {% endblock timeouts %}

The ``mtda`` device type needs to be registered as follows::

    $ sudo lava-server manage device-types add mtda

Register devices
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A Jinja file for your test device needs to be created in
``/etc/lava-server/dispatcher-config/devices/`` with the following contents::

    {% extends 'mtda.jinja2' %}
    {% set mtda_agent = 'mtda-for-de0-nano-soc.lan' %}

where ``mtda-for-de0-nano-soc.lan`` is the name of the host running the MTDA agent
and being physically connected to the device to be tested. The file should be
named ``<device>.jinja2`` where ``<device>`` is the name of your device (e.g.
``de0-nano-soc1``).

Once created, the device needs to be registered::

    $ lava-server manage devices add \
          --device-type mtda \
          --worker mtda-for-de0-nano-soc.lan \
          de0-nano-soc1

It should be noted that while MTDA agent images include ``lava-dispatcher``,
you may choose to use a separate worker (``mtda-cli`` needs to be installed)
to get more adequate storage (test images are downloaded on the worker) and/or
more compute power as depicted below:

.. image:: lava_shared_worker.png

Change the ``--worker`` option to use this intermediate node instead of the
MTDA agent.

Context variables
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

LAVA jobs may override variables from device or device-type dictionaries. By
default, only white-listed variables (about a dozen options for qemu machines
and a dozen miscellaneous options) may be added to the ``context`` dictionary.
Additional keywords may be added to the schema by adding the following line
to ``/etc/lava-server/settings.conf``::

    "EXTRA_CONTEXT_VARIABLES": ["mtda_agent"]

The LAVA server will require a restart for these changes to take effect (it
will otherwise refuse to validate job definitions having MTDA options listed
under the ``context`` clause.

Commit message:

assistant: add HomeKit setup code to the environment
No longer require SSH access to the MTDA device to get the HomeKit
setup code. It will instead be added to the environment as a new
variable: homekit-setup-code. Clients may use the getenv command
to retrieve that code to setup the device in the IOS application.

Signed-off-by: Cedric Hombourger <chombourger@gmail.com>

docs/integration.rst, after:

Integrate with
==============

HomeKit
-------

Introduction
~~~~~~~~~~~~

HomeKit is a smart home system to control appliances. MTDA may advertise itself
as a HomeKit compatible (but not certified) device to let users turn test devices
ON or OFF using Apple's Home application or its assistant (Siri).

Configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Add the following configuration block to your MTDA configuration file::

    [assistant]
    variant=homekit
    name=MyDevice
    port=32768

where ``name`` is the user-friendly name to be advertise on the network and
``port`` the network port to listen on.

Setup
~~~~~

Use the IOS Home application to register your MTDA device as an accessory

.. image:: homekit_add_1.png
   :width: 50%
   :align: center

Proceed without a QR code by tapping on ``I Don't have a Code or Cannot Scan``

.. image:: homekit_add_2.png
   :width: 50%
   :align: center

The requested code may be retrieved using the ``getenv`` command provided by
``mtda-cli``::

    $ mtda-cli -r my-mtda-device.lan getenv homekit-setup-code
    534-60-652

where ``my-mtda-device.lan`` is the name or IP address of the device running
the MTDA service. To finalize the setup of your MTDA device, tell ``Home``
where it sits and give it a name. It is recommended to display our MTDA device
as a ``Power Point``.

The ``Home`` application should now have an outlet icon for your MTDA and show its
status. Tapping on the icon will toggle power for the device attached to MTDA.

LAVA
----

Introduction
~~~~~~~~~~~~

LAVA is a continuous integration platform for deploying and testing operating systems
onto physical and virtual hardware. It needs methods to power targets, write system
images and interact with the system (usually over a serial console). These mechanics
can be provided/abstracted by MTDA. A sample deployment is shown below:

.. image:: lava_mtda_workers.png

This section provides some guidance to install LAVA and configure it to interact with
MTDA agents. Please refer to the LAVA documentation for details or for more advanced
configuration.

Install on Debian
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A LAVA instance may be installed on Debian with ``apt``::

    $ sudo apt install -y lava

Create ``/etc/lava-server/settings.conf`` with the following settings for a
simple installation::

    "ALLOWED_HOSTS": ["infra-lava.lan"]
    "CSRF_COOKIE_SECURE": false
    "SESSION_COOKIE_SECURE": false

Replace ``infra-lava.lan`` with the network name of your Debian server. A super
user should be created::

    $ sudo lava-server manage createsuperuser --username john --email=john@foo.com

The web interface should be enabled with::

    $ sudo a2dissite 000-default
    $ sudo a2enmod proxy
    $ sudo a2enmod proxy_http
    $ sudo a2ensite lava-server.conf
    $ sudo service apache2 restart
    $ sudo service lava-server-gunicorn restart

Attach to lava-server
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The sample NanoPI NEO image comes with the ``lava-dispatcher`` package
pre-installed. It however needs to be configured to connect to the LAVA master
and logger installed as noted above. You may connect to the MTDA agent using
``ssh`` (default credentials are ``mdta``/``mtda``)::

    $ ssh mtda@mtda-for-de0-nano-soc.lan

Use ``vi`` to edit ``/etc/lava-dispatcher/lava-slave``::

    $ sudo vi /etc/lava-dispatcher/lava-slave

and set the following variables to match your network::

    MASTER_URL="tcp://infra-lava.lan:5556"
    LOGGER_URL="tcp://infra-lava.lan:5555"
    HOSTNAME="--hostname mtda-for-de0-nano-soc.lan"

The service should be restarted::

    $ sudo systemctl restart lava-slave

Device support
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A ``mtda`` device type may be added to your LAVA installation and used as a
base for devices added to your LAVA instance. Create
``/etc/lava-server/dispatcher-config/device-types/mtda.jinja2`` as follows::

    {# device_type: mtda #}
    {% extends 'base.jinja2' %}

    {% set def_mtda_agent = 'localhost' %}
    {% set mtda_cli = 'mtda-cli -r ' ~ mtda_agent|default(def_mtda_agent) %}

    {% set connection_command = mtda_cli ~ ' console raw' %}
    {% set power_off_command = mtda_cli ~ ' target off' %}
    {% set power_on_command = mtda_cli ~ ' target on' %}
    {% set hard_reset_command = mtda_cli ~ ' target reset' %}

    {% set def_mtda_deploy_cmds = [mtda_cli ~ ' target off',
                                   mtda_cli ~ ' storage host',
                                   mtda_cli ~ ' storage write "{IMAGE}"',
                                   mtda_cli ~ ' storage target'] %}

    {% block body %}
    actions:
      deploy:
        methods:
          flasher:
            commands: {{ mtda_deploy_cmds|default(def_mtda_deploy_cmds) }}
      boot:
        connections:
          serial:
        methods:
          minimal:
    {% endblock body %}

    {% block timeouts %}
    timeouts:
      actions:
        bootloader-retry:
          minutes: 2
        bootloader-interrupt:
          minutes: 5
        bootloader-commands:
          minutes: 5
      connections:
        bootloader-retry:
          minutes: 2
        bootloader-interrupt:
          minutes: 5
        bootloader-commands:
          minutes: 5
    {% endblock timeouts %}

The ``mtda`` device type needs to be registered as follows::

    $ sudo lava-server manage device-types add mtda

Register devices
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A Jinja file for your test device needs to be created in
``/etc/lava-server/dispatcher-config/devices/`` with the following contents::

    {% extends 'mtda.jinja2' %}
    {% set mtda_agent = 'mtda-for-de0-nano-soc.lan' %}

where ``mtda-for-de0-nano-soc.lan`` is the name of the host running the MTDA agent
and being physically connected to the device to be tested. The file should be
named ``<device>.jinja2`` where ``<device>`` is the name of your device (e.g.
``de0-nano-soc1``).

Once created, the device needs to be registered::

    $ lava-server manage devices add \
          --device-type mtda \
          --worker mtda-for-de0-nano-soc.lan \
          de0-nano-soc1

It should be noted that while MTDA agent images include ``lava-dispatcher``,
you may choose to use a separate worker (``mtda-cli`` needs to be installed)
to get more adequate storage (test images are downloaded on the worker) and/or
more compute power as depicted below:

.. image:: lava_shared_worker.png

Change the ``--worker`` option to use this intermediate node instead of the
MTDA agent.

Context variables
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

LAVA jobs may override variables from device or device-type dictionaries. By
default, only white-listed variables (about a dozen options for qemu machines
and a dozen miscellaneous options) may be added to the ``context`` dictionary.
Additional keywords may be added to the schema by adding the following line
to ``/etc/lava-server/settings.conf``::

    "EXTRA_CONTEXT_VARIABLES": ["mtda_agent"]

The LAVA server will require a restart for these changes to take effect (it
will otherwise refuse to validate job definitions having MTDA options listed
under the ``context`` clause.
